

MotoManager Case-in-Point

Here is an example of an AI consulting firm that used the EVP framework to
meet the business needs of a popular automotive services provider.

Mr. Tire-Monro Muffler and Brake (a subsidiary of Monro Inc.) is a top-50
automotive parts and general repair services provider in the U.S., with over
320 locations nationwide. In general, the automotive services industry
struggles with customer retention. Companies record many one-time-only
transactions (frequently with a deep-discount coupon), but fewer transactions
from repeat customers (who typically provide much more revenue per year per
customer). Lack of customer “stickiness” leads to a) less potential revenue,
and b) less data about customers in general, which could potentially be used
to offer specific products and services to individual customers. Attempts to
increase customer acquisition and retention via email marketing, and
television and online advertisements did little to increase the proportion of
repeat customers.

Monro Inc. (the parent company of Mr. Tire) approached Cognistx (an AI
applications company) to develop a data-driven solution to improve customer
acquisition and retention. The video above provides a brief summary of how
Cognistx engaged with Mr. Tire to develop MotoManager, a mobile app that was
deployed by Mr. Tire. This solution led to measured increases in customer
acquisition and retention, as well as increased revenue.

The Cognistx data science team met with the business leaders of Monro Inc. to
gain an understanding of the company’s business needs related to customer
retention. The data science team identified and interviewed all stakeholders
from the business and technical teams at Monro Inc including the Data
Management, Information Technology, and Service Management teams. The IT
managers provided information about the company’s data asset management
structure including data governance, data architecture, and data security
management. Accessible and reliable data is important to the solution vision
process; a company without adequate data management can not support an
analytical solution that might meet their business needs.

Additional Reading

Data Management in the Enterprise

Finally, service managers were interviewed on customer service difficulties
that could be addressed by the proposed solution. The service managers also
identified the hardware and software gaps in the various stores around the
country. Once the interviews were completed, the Cognistx data science team
formulated business objectives that would meet Monro Inc.’s business needs.
The business objectives included:

  * Create an application that provides customers with a customized service experience for their automotive needs. 

  * Offer customers $50 coupon to download Monro Inc mobile app. 

  * Onboard customers to the application with the creation of customer profiles. 

  * Provide tailored customer service management to very important (VIP) customers. 

  * Classify customers as VIP customers based on defined characteristics. 

  * Create a loyalty program to increase repeat customer transactions. 

Business objectives should be measurable to ensure that business needs are
met. The metrics used to assess the success of the project were measured by:

  * Count of people who installed the app and on-boarded upon receiving a $50 e-coupon. 

  * The number of times an on-boarded customer visited a store close to them. 

  * Number of transactions completed with the app. 

  * Total amount of money generated via the app compared to total amount of money used to maintain the app. 

  * A model that can predict a repeat customer from on-boarded customers with an accuracy of 85% 

The metrics were both technical (precision and accuracy of model) and business
related (calculate return-on-investment).

Based on the business objectives, Cognistx developed an AI-enabled application
for Monro Inc called MotoManager. MotoManager captures a comprehensive profile
of customers through an onboarding process. Monro Inc. sends a $50 coupon
incentive to current and potential customers. This coupon can be retrieved
when a customer installs the application and completes their user profile. The
MotoManager app uses customer data to provide customized reward incentives for
booking services and making purchases from a customer’s local Mr. Tire store.
As of 2019, the app has a 53,000 user strength and Monro Inc has reported
significant increases in customer engagement and retention. The company has
generated over $14 million US dollars from app-based transactions.

