

Data governance defines how data is accessed and managed within an
organization. It is important because it facilitates effective data management
and has positive implications for the quality, security, and integrity of data
used for analysis. An organization that handles data efficiently understands
that data governance impacts data quality and the decisions that can be made
from the data available to the organization. This unit focuses on data
governance as a component of data management, and how it influences the
development of analytic solutions in an organization and decision making. Any
organization that stores and utilizes data should have a data governance
strategy for internal data or data stored within the organization and external
data.

Data governance is beneficial because it provides a reliable and consistent
view of enterprise wide data, it ensures that there is a plan for improved
quality of data, maps the location of data in the enterprise reducing the
scourge of data silos, and improves data management overall.

Reading: Data Governance in the Cloud .  
  
---  
  
Data governance is the responsibility of an entire organization although it is
administered by the data management team; all users of data in an organization
are considered stakeholders of the organization's data. The Data Governance
Institute defines a stakeholder as an individual or group that make or is
affected by data driven decisions within an organization. In addition to data
governance policies, data stakeholders will have an influence on the state and
use of data. As a quick reminder, the data science team works with different
individuals in an organization to define business and analytic objectives
during the data science project lifecycle, as well as determining the
requirements for the analytic solution. So why is data governance important to
a member of a data science project team?

Data governance is not just policy making for data, it is more than that; it
influences business strategy because data is now (more than ever) considered
as an asset to an organization. An organization that has embedded data
governance principles into its data infrastructure or data management
framework will abide by data standards (industry set, or company defined).

Data governance best practices for organizations are met when data has
integrity, and data related decisions and controls are transparent and can be
audited. Another best practice that is gaining ground in industry is the push
for organizations to collect and store data that is unbiased. Unbiased data
looks different to each organization and industry but the general idea is that
the data represents all members of a population that could be served by an
organization. This best practice will positively influence the development of
ethical models and algorithms for analytic solutions.

Reading: Data Governance and its implications for ethical models  
  
---  
  
