

Prediction involves using a model to predict outcomes. If you want to predict
the number of hospital beds that will be needed in the event of a surge in
Ebola cases in the DRC using historic data from past outbreaks, we will assume
that there is a linear relationship between the number of hospital beds needed
and other variables related to the outbreak, you will fit a linear model on
the training data and select the model that minimizes test error.

Inference. Instances may arise when you need to understand how your dependent
variable Y is affected by changes in independent variables. Your goal is not
to make predictions in this case, instead you will estimate f by making
inferences or gaining understanding on the relationship between your
independent and dependent variables. You might also be interested in assessing
if the relationship between your dependent variable and each independent
variable can be explained using a linear equation.

Estimating f

When creating analytic solutions, you encounter the model understanding phase
which might include using both linear and non-linear approaches to estimate f.
When estimating f , you would have gathered a dataset, keeping in mind that
the entire dataset will not be used to estimate f, instead we will use a
portion of the dataset to train our model to estimate f. This dataset is
called the training data set. A statistical method will be applied to the
training data to then estimate f. Typically, you will use one of the following
methods for this process:

Parametric Methods assume that your dataset comes from a population that has a
fixed set of parameters. Non-Parametric Methods seek an estimate of f that is
close to the data points. A thin plate spline can be used to estimate f. It
seeks to estimate f that is close to the observed data. Thin plate spline is a
two-dimensional analog of a spline constructed of piecewise third-order
polynomials which pass through a set of control points. A spline is a
piecewise polynomial function that has a simple form locally but can be
flexible globally. A polynomial is a mathematical expression that involves a
sum of powers in variables multiplied by coefficients. Non parametric methods
include Spearman correlation test and U-test for two independent means.

The table below summarizes the differences between the two methods.

Parametric Methods

|

Non-Parametric Methods  
  
---|---  
  
Models are built with a fixed number of parameters.

|

Models are built with any number of parameters.  
  
It has strong assumptions about data.

|

It has fewer assumptions about data.  
  
Needs less data than non-parametric methods e.g sign test.

|

Needs significant amount of data.  
  
Possess statistical power.

|

Has less statistical power.  
  
Source: ISLR1. Flexibility and Interpretability of Statistical Methods.

You will study different methods to estimate f in future modules and you will
find that some of those models are either very flexible with low
interpretability or very interpretable with low flexibility. Take a look at
the figure above, you will see that if you are interested in inference, a
restrictive linear model that shows the relationship between your dependent
variable (Y) and independent variables will be the best choice for estimating
f. A generalized additive model (GAM) will extend a linear model to encompass
non-linear relationships, making GAMs more flexible. Methods that are more
flexible tend to allow for non-linear relationships and they have low
interpretability than your less flexible methods. When prediction is the task
of interest, flexibility is key and because interpretability is not a high
concern, you can use the methods with less interpretability.

Using a method with low interpretability is not the only route to take when
pursuing a prediction task. This process of selecting the right method for a
data science modeling task can be quite daunting but we will be exploring the
different types of selection techniques throughout Unit 5. Going forward, we
will discuss the different data science patterns and the methods that are used
to estimate f. You will also learn about the criteria that is used to select
the best model.

