

The exploratory data analysis (EDA) process is comprised of visualizing data
to allow a data scientist or a data analyst explore datasets to gain insights
from the data. There are some non-graphical techniques that are used to
explore data and as well as graphical techniques. Non-graphical techniques
include using summary statistics to describe the data and the graphical
techniques are used to describe the frequency distribution of the dataset.
Both techniques can be used to show the skewness and extreme outliers in a
dataset.

Summarizing Data

Summarizing data is dependent on the types of data present in your dataset.
When you want to understand the observed data a.k.a your sample, you will key
descriptors of a dataset. When you have a large data set, it is difficult to
describe it in its raw form. You will use specific techniques to summarize and
describe your sample. Some of those techniques include Describing Central
Tendency and Assessing Measures of Spread and Relationships.

You can use the location, shape and spread of the data in a dataset to
understand the data. You might find some of the concepts below as a review of
your first Statistics course, but pay attention to the reason for using these
techniques in exploring your data. Also, these concepts are important for when
you learn about using statistical inference to draw conclusions on an unknown
population parameter.

Location. During the EDA process, we are looking to describe our data using a
central value. We will explore the Mean which is sometimes called the average,
this is the sum total of all observations divided by the number of
observations. You will calculate the mean for your population (population mean
= μ) and for the sample that you have drawn (sample mean = x̄). There are
different types of mean including the typical arithmetic mean, geometric mean,
and the harmonic mean.

Reading: Central Tendency with Different Types of Means.

Median is the mid value of a dataset. To calculate a median value, you will
sort your data in ascending order. The median value in a data set with odd
number of observations is the middle value, while you can find the median of a
dataset with even observations by calculating the average of the two middle
values.

**Do you know that if the mean and median of your data set differ greatly, you
should check that variable for outliers!**

Mode is the variable of an observation that most frequently occurs in your
dataset. A uni-modal variable is one that has just one mode and a bimodal
variable has two modes. If your variable has more than two modes, it can be
referred to as multi-modal. Do not think it is useless in the EDA process, the
mode is quite useful when summarizing categorical variables.

Percentile. You will remember this nifty word from your GRE scores or height
and weight data from your health records. It tells you the position of a value
in your dataset. If you are 175cm in height and you are in the 10th percentile
of height measurement for your gender, it means that among all the height data
collected for your gender, you are taller than 10% of those observations. The
50th percentile is considered the median. Quartiles are values that split the
data into quarters.

Spread. How can you describe the spread or variability of your dataset? You
use the measures of dispersion. Although used for descriptive statistics, you
must be careful in relying on this measure to describe variability.

Range of a set of values can be calculated by subtracting the minimum value in
your dataset from the maximum value. Notice that range only considers two
values and ignores all other values of a variable.

Mean Absolute Deviation is the "average distance between each value and the
mean of a dataset". This measure of dispersion can tell you how values are
spread out in a dataset and determines whether the mean is a useful indicator
of the values within the data. The larger the mean absolute deviation, the
more spread out the data. When you work with time series forecasting methods,
you will use the mean absolute deviation to measure the performance of a
forecasting model. You will find that the measures used in EDA are often used
in model selection criteria.

Reading: Mean Deviation = (Σ|x − μ|)/N. This is the sum of the absolute values
minus the mean and divide this by the number of values in the dataset.

Variance s2 / σ2 is the average of the squared difference between the
observations in a dataset and the mean. So far, we know that you can have
measures for both your overall population and your sample drawn from the
population. Keep in mind that you will sometimes have a sample variance s2  or
a population variance σ2. The difference between both is that you are looking
at the spread of data from the sample mean versus the population mean.

Standard deviation σ or s is the most common measure of dispersion, it tells
you the distance of the values from the mean in your dataset. A low standard
deviation tells you that the values are close to the mean and a high standard
deviation means there is a spread. The σ is derived by calculating the square
root of the variance. As you perform exploratory data analysis and even while
developing models, the importance of the standard deviation can not be
overstated. Despite its mention as a way to summarize data, standard deviation
is used to "measure the confidence in statistical conclusions" and if you
remember from the overview of this Unit, you will be conducting statistical
inference to begin to draw some conclusions on your data and hypotheses.

Interquartile Range (IQR) similar to the range, does not consider all
observations when looking at the spread of values in a dataset. IQR describes
50% of values in your dataset when arranged in ascending order. The IQR is the
difference between the values in Quartile 3 and the values in Quartile 1. You
can use this measure to identify a value that is an outlier.

Shape. Now that you can explain the measures used to explore data by
describing its central value, its spread from the mean, and identified
outliers, let us describe the distribution of a dataset and assess whether it
is normally distributed. Normally distributed data is useful when making
statistical inferences. How can we assess the distribution of our data:

Skewness measures the degree to which the distribution of data lacks symmetry.
A dataset with 0 skewness is considered normally distributed. Data does not
always have a skewness of 0; however, if you have found skewness to be between
-0.5 and 0.5, you can ascertain that your data is symmetrical. If skewness is
between -1 and -0.5 or 0.5 and 1, then your data is moderately skewed. If
skewness is < -1 or > 1, your data is highly skewed.

Source: BPI Consulting LLC

Kurtosis looks at the outliers within the distribution. This measure of shape
will describe the distribution of data by showing whether the tails of the
distribution are more or less extreme than the normal distribution.

Reading: Kurtosis

Relationships and Association

Covariance describes the linear relationship between variables in your sample
or population data. Covariance can be negative ,meaning your variables have a
negative linear relationship, zero (0) meaning the variables have no linear
relationship, or positive meaning a positive linear relationship exists
between the variables.

Correlation Coefficient will describe the strength of the linear relationship
between the variables x and y. It is a different measure than covariance
because it describes both the direction and strength of the linear
relationship between the variables. If the correlation coefficient equals:

Correlation Coefficient

|

Meaning  
  
---|---  
  
-1

|

Variables have a perfect negative linear relationship.  
  
0

|

Variables are not linearly related.  
  
1

|

Variables have a perfect positive linear relationship.  
  
Outliers

Whenever you have a rather small or large observation within your dataset
compared to other values in the dataset, this is called an outlier. Outliers
will affect the performance of your model and prior to getting to that point,
your exploratory data analysis. When you have a large dataset, the outliers
are not as noticeable as when you have a smaller dataset. Similar to missing
values, you must handle outliers when you identify them in your dataset. You
should refrain from removing them from the dataset until proper investigation
is completed. You can "handle" outliers by following these steps:

Construct a Boxplot or as it is sometimes called, a box and whisker plot. This
chart is used to graph the five number summary. The five number summary is
used to identify an outlier in your dataset. A five-number summary consists of
five values including the the maximum and minimum values in your dataset, the
lower and upper quartiles, and the median. These values are then ordered in
ascending order and plotted.

Box plots provide a visual summary of the data so that data scientists and
analysts can identify outliers and other summary statistics including the
skewness and mean. You will typically plot your box plot using a tool of your
choice, in this course that would be python. Here is a resource on how to plot
a Box Plot using Python.

Box Plot. Source. University of Manchester

z-score is a measure of the relative position of an observation within a
dataset. You calculate the z-score by subtracting the value from the mean and
dividing that value by the standard deviation. If an observation has a z-score
that is more than 3 or less than -3, it is an outlier!

Graphical Summaries

The saying that a picture tells a thousand words supports the notion that
visualizing data is one of the best ways to tell a story to a wide audience
with the ability to view the visuals. Today, there are so many tools that are
used to visualize data including Python, R, Excel, Tableau, Microsoft's
PowerBI among others. These tools even allow us to make data visualizations
interactive for more effective analysis. Rene Descartes invented the Cartesian
coordinate system or the X and Y axis graph as we know it.

One of the first Cartesian Coordinates Graphs

Data visualizations have evolved greatly. Including info-graphics, plots, and
statistical graphs. Communicating insights in the data clearly is a key step
in the data science process. There is a skill to developing effective
visualizations and not all data scientists will have these skills, however it
is important to know how to use the tools that support visualization and be
able to identify the right types of visualizations for the data types, and the
best ways to tell your story with visualizations. Visualization experts
strongly suggest that visualizations should stimulate the attention of viewers
and elicit thoughts and questions. During the data science project process,
visualizations will be used at different times. At this stage of exploratory
data analysis, the visualizations are used to understand the dataset as you
proceed through analytic solution building. Gaining a better understanding of
your data will support the performance of your models in the later stages of
the project.

Visualizing Variables

So far, we have talked about visualizing mostly numeric data, however we are
able to visualize categorical data as well. Typically, this data is
categorized and numeric values are derived (counted) to represent the values
in the variables. A frequency distribution is a useful technique in displaying
categorical variables.

Follow our primer below to learn more about the appropriate visualizations for
data science tasks.

Reading: Data Exploration and Visualization Primer.

As we study exploratory data analysis, we will learn how to describe sample
data by making inferences from the population on which the sample data was
drawn. Despite the sampling techniques used, there is still a level of
uncertainty in drawing conclusions about your population. We find that
descriptive statistics is not enough to estimate this uncertainty; hence the
need for statistical inference. On the next page, we will explore statistical
inference further.

Additional Reading: The Dr. Howard Seltman Experimental Design and Analysis
book is a text that explores experimental design and analysis and is worth a
look through.

Stephen Few3 listed eight types of quantitative data and the types of charts
and graphs that can communicate the story in the data.

Reading: Selecting the Right Graph for Your Message.  
  
---  
  
