

Each data science project is unique and will require a data collection
technique that suits the problem and objectives it seeks to meet. The data
collection techniques for a sentiment analysis project analyzing social media
tweets will differ from the techniques of an image classification project for
patient diagnosis. When you defined the project's business and analytic
objectives, the tasks and methods were proposed as well, those tasks and
methods drive the type of data that will be used in the project. The type of
data will influence the source and data collection techniques. Once you have
completed this module, you will be able to distinguish between the various
data types and sources, alongside the traditional data collection techniques.

Data Types

Data holds value to businesses and can present itself in various forms. You
identify data types as it affects the methods you will choose to develop an
analytic solution. Data types are also dependent on its source, so you can
consider the type of data according to how it is represented in its source.
Reference the link below for a refresher on the common data types:

Reading: Classes of Data Types.

When discussing data types in data science, data is typically categorized as
numeric or categorical and classified as one of the four measurement scale
types. Numeric data is represented as continuous or discrete values, while
categorical data can be nominal or ordinal values.

Numeric Data

|

Categorical Data  
  
---|---  
  
Discrete: There are 31 days in the month of May

|

Ordinal: I can rate my customer service experience at the grocery store as
Good.  
  
Continuous: You were born on May 13th 1997 so as of May 28th 2020, you are 23
years, 2 weeks, and 1 day old.

|

Nominal: What is your hair color? Brown.  
  
Qualitative and Quantitative Data

Quantitative data is data that is expressed in numerically and derived from
questions such as how many courses are you enrolled in this semester; how much
do Data Scientists earn? Meanwhile, qualitative data is descriptive data that
is collected from observations instead of measurements. Qualitative data is
sometimes transformed to enable it to be used in certain machine learning
modeling techniques that require quantitative data. Both data types are
collected and analyzed in different ways.

Structured and Unstructured Data

Structured Data is organized facts that are presented in fixed formats and are
easy to extract. This data can be stored in spreadsheets, relational databases
and other repositories in the row and column format. Unstructured data is most
difficult to extract, it is not easily stored in typical relational databases
and spreadsheets because it does not fit in the row and column structure. It
cannot be maintained in formats that are uniform. Text, multimedia files, and
log files from servers are examples of unstructured data. New generation
databases also known as NoSQL databases were built to handle unstructured
data. Unlike structured data, unstructured data can be stored without a
predefined schema.

Internal and External Data

Data can also be classified as Internal data, which is data collected and/or
controlled by an organization. An example would be personnel data collected
and stored by the human resources department. We also have External data, data
that is collected from sources outside of an organization. Census data, and
data gathered from credit reporting agencies are examples of external data.

A company has surveyed its customers on their satisfaction with a newly
released service. The questions asked in the short survey include:

How much do you earn: Numeric response

What level of education have you completed: Categorical response

What industry are you employed: Categorical response

How many people are in your household: Numeric response

What part of the country do you reside: Categorical response

Data Sources

The different types of data that we explored earlier are collected through
different sources. Primary data sources includes data that is collected and
processed by an organization and housed internally. Secondary data sources
include data that is gathered from sources external to an organization. Keep
in mind that internal data can come from a primary or secondary data source
and that an organization's data governance framework affect data that is
collected from primary and secondary sources as long as they are used by the
organization.

The Largest Data Source. The web is considered the largest data source. Data
from the web can be sourced from social media, search engines, and machine
data. In the next module, we will focus on this source in depth.

