

The data collection process in the data science lifecycle can be compared to
the data collection process in scholarly research. Data collection is the
process of gathering and analyzing data that can meet defined business and
analytic objectives. Data collection should be conducted systematically to
ensure that the data is valid and reliable. In this section, we will explore
the traditional methods used to collect data and describe how data can be
collected via methods that reduce bias.

Data Collection Methods

Data collection before and during the data science project lifecycle includes
data collected to define business and analytic objectives, data collected to
define business requirements, and then the data needed for developing an
analytic solution. Let us explore the traditional methods to collecting data:

Questionnaires and surveys. Questionnaires are used to collect data from a
group of individuals. Questionnaires can be administered on paper or online,
it might be easier to distribute questionnaires online as there are efficient
tools that can analyze the data. Questionnaires can have open-ended, closed-
ended, rating, Likert scale, or multiple-choice questions. Data cleansing is
still a consideration with questionnaire data as errors can occur. For
example, responses to open-ended questions can contain misspellings among
other errors.

Interviews. Interviews are used to collect data from small groups and unlike
questionnaires, the questions are typically open-ended.

Observations. Data collected during an observation can support data collected
during interviews and from questionnaires. Observations allow for the
examination of subjects as they perform their duties.

Focus groups. Focus groups can be used to explore topics that are difficult to
observe, and sensitive topics.

The collection methods above are can be considered as obtrusive data
collection methods meaning the participants of the data collection exercise
are aware that data is being collected from them for a purpose. There are
unobtrusive data collection methods, those methods involve collecting data
from web sources (Data from the web is used for data science related tasks
including sentiment analysis, text classification, among others), document
analysis, and use of available datasets from a data repository. Unobtrusive
data collection methods can be done without the knowledge of the subject of
the study. As is done in research studies and emphasized with data governance
policies, data gathering must be done in an ethical manner.In the next module,
we will explore collecting data from non traditional sources using non
transforming and enriching the data to make it usable for analysis.

