

When we want to study the hidden structure of data and identify different
groups within that structure, we use the Cluster Analysis technique. Once
groups are constructed, it is safe to assume that data points within each
group have similar features and are very dissimilar to data points in other
groups. Cluster analysis is looking to define structure within a dataset.

There are different types of clustering techniques. We will briefly define at
this point and fully explore in an upcoming module.

K-means clustering is a widely used clustering technique that computes the
distance between data points in a group and the center of the group. The
number of clusters (k) is decided before the process begins and kmeans
clustering can only be applied to numerical variables. This is because it
solely uses euclidean distance as a similarity measure to form clusters.

It is not uncommon to begin by randomly selecting a number of observations
from your data as the initial cluster center, the remaining observations will
then be assigned to the nearest cluster center. The algorithm will continue to
assign and reassign observations to their closest clusters by calculating the
cluster centroids (this is the middle of a cluster). The reassignment is done
to minimize dispersion within clusters.

Hierarchical clustering connects data points to form clusters based on their
distance and is also known as a connectivity-based clustering. Each data point
is considered its own cluster at the start of the process and then the
algorithm groups clusters based on similarity until true clusters are formed.
This is known as Agglomerative clustering. There is another approach of
hierarchical clustering that puts all data points in one cluster and then
separated them based on dissimilarity until different clusters are formed.
This is called Divisive Clusters. Hierarchical Clusters are formed and
represented using a dendrogram (shown below). The y-axis of a dendrogram marks
the distance were clusters merge, and data points are placed on the x-axis.

Example of a Dendrogram. Source-Mathlab

Similar to regression and classification techniques, clustering output should
be evaluated. Evaluation methods differ based on the kind of clustering
technique used to meet your analytic objective. Module 14 will focus on the
different types of clustering techniques and the evaluation techniques that
apply to each technique.

Reading: Evaluating Clustering Results  
  
---  
  
