

As you have learned in a previous unit, gaining an understanding of the
business need and formulating project objectives (business and analytic) are
best practices for successfully meeting client expectations. Once the project
objectives have been defined, the project team will identify the needs and
constraints of stakeholders and the current system or environment related to
the business need; this is referred to as the Requirements Gathering Process.

Requirements gathering establishes communication between the solutions
development team (referred to as the project team in this unit) and the
business stakeholders. The objective of the requirements gathering process is
to define the system inputs, processes, outputs, and interfaces. When properly
done, requirements gathering will positively influence the outcome of a
project. Requirements gathering can also help the project team to visualize
the intended solution.

The requirements gathering process involves input from the system users and
system owners. A system user interacts with the solution and a system owner
(who can also be a user) is an official who is responsible for decisions made
about systems within their organization. In this unit, we will refer to these
roles as stakeholders.

Similar to traditional software development projects, data science projects
are also guided by requirements gathering principles, figure 3 lists the steps
that are followed during the process. Requirements gathering for a data
science project will involve eliciting the needs of the stakeholders, and
defining the requirements for the analytic solution(s).

Figure 3: Requirements Gathering Process

The requirements gathering process involves eliciting user and system needs,
and defining data and analytic requirements for the successful implementation
of a data related project.

  * Gather Information: The first step in gathering information is to identify the stakeholders within the business; the stakeholders will be individuals who perform tasks that will meet the business need, as well as decision makers within the business. Once stakeholders are identified, the business analyst will elicit information to determine what the solution should do to meet the defined business and analytic objectives. Later on in this unit, we will discuss the techniques used to gather information.

  * Define and Prioritize Requirements: Stakeholders will provide information according to their view of the business needs, it is the job of the business analyst to lead the effort in defining and prioritizing requirements. It is important to document "complete" requirements that capture the needs of the stakeholders, as this will guide the project team in developing the right solution(s). Stakeholders might provide information that can be used for future projects related to the proposed solution, that information should not be discarded, it is prioritized as a low priority requirement and considered for future implementation. 

  * Evaluate Requirements: The project team must verify and validate all documented requirements. This additional step in the requirements gathering process will ensure that the solution meets the business needs and satisfies the expectations of the stakeholders.

  * Receive Sign-Off: This is an indication that the requirements have been approved and agreed upon by the client. Requirements are signed off twice during the development lifecycle; sign-offs take place prior to the start of solution development and after testing the solution.

Requirements Management Plan

A requirements management plan can be used to document the requirements
gathering process. This document is made available to the client and the
project team as it contains information that affects both parties. There is no
standard template for this document but it is in good practice to include the
following sections:

Project description is an overview of your project, this section describes the
purpose of your project.

Team Responsibilities are defined in this plan to designate who will be
involved in managing activities during the requirements gathering process.
Data science project team members might take on duties outside of their normal
roles e.g. a data analyst on the data science team might serve in the role of
Scribe during joint application development sessions.

Tools used to manage the requirements include project management tools, and
word processing or other dedicated systems used to capture, manage, and track
requirements through the requirements gathering process and throughout the
project lifecycle.

Requirements Gathering Process should be defined in this plan. This section
will describe the techniques used in eliciting user and system needs, defining
the requirements, and evaluating the success of the requirements gathering
process (these techniques are covered later in this unit).

Change control and requirements gathering: Modern day collaboration tools will
support change control. However, a change control process should be documented
to ensure that changes to requirements are formally managed.  
  
---  
  
