

Business Requirements

Suppose a utility company wants to introduce personalized service management
to its customers including a secure electronic payment facility, and the
ability to view usage statistics. This business objective will lead to the
development of a mobile application for customer service management. Business
requirements for the above scenario will include describing the context,
scope, and background of the business need, including reasons for the proposed
change. Business requirements are collected and decomposed to define other
types of requirements.

System and User Requirements

Once business requirements are defined, stakeholders and systems that support
the business requirement(s) are identified. System requirements are a detailed
description of the system and its operational and development constraints;
this includes the system software that will support the solution, processing,
memory, and other application software considerations. User requirements
describe functions or tasks that a user must perform within the system. These
tasks will support the business objectives that are defined prior to the
requirements gathering process.

Use cases and user stories represent user requirements and provide a big
picture of what the user will be able to do within a system. An example of a
use case is “Make Payment” on a mobile application. We will describe user and
system requirements later in this unit.

Solution Requirements

Solution requirements are grounded in software engineering, in this course, we
will be tailoring solution requirements to the data science process. The
solution requirements for a data science project are classified into
functional, non-functional requirements, as well as requirements that consider
parts of an analytic solution that are different from the traditional IT
systems. The typical analytic solution will consider data and models (e.g.
predictive models), a business intelligence solution will include requirements
for reports and dashboards.

