

Errors At All Phases

A quick survey of both scholarly and practitioner literature, you will read
that errors can make or break the analytic development process and render your
analytic solution "of little use" to your client. Errors can start from the
business understanding phase, when a data science team does not set the
appropriate analytic objectives due to misunderstanding the business context
and needs. This misunderstanding will lead to bloated costs, and scope creep.
A data science team might also encounter errors during the data understanding
phase. Issues with data that is not prepared adequately, or even worse
collecting data that is not relevant to your analytic solution. Errors in the
data understanding phase can occur due to inexperience within the data science
team, and an attempt to deliver a solution hurriedly.

Errors in Model Understanding

The model understanding phase also presents errors that we should explore as
we are learning about the different data science patterns and techniques that
can be used to solve data related problems. Errors in this phase are used to
validate models. Errors will reveal if the expected performance of a model
will be sufficient for deploying to production. The models below are errors
that you will hear about throughout your career as data scientists. As we
learn about different techniques, we will further explore how to assess models
based on certain error estimates.

Training Error is derived by calculating the classification error of a model
on the exact data that was used to train the model.

Test Error is important as it gives insight into the amount of errors to
expect when making future predictions and it is used for model selection. None
of your training data set should be part of the test data as it can affect the
accuracy of the test error.

Irreducible error, is the noise term in the true relationship that cannot
fundamentally be reduced by any model. When x can not determine y because
there are other predictors that might improve the prediction error, you
incorporate those variables.

Reducible Error is the error resulting from a mismatch between f and f hat or
the estimate of the relationship between x and y and its true relationship.

As we explore the different methods, we will dive deeper into calculating the
error rate for the models trained using those methods.

