

Once it is determined that an organization is Data Science ready, the project
team will gather requirements that will enable the development of an analytics
solution to meet the defined business need(s).

Let us explore a scenario with a two-year college that is seeking to improve
recruitment of new students and increase retention of existing students by
10%, over the next five (5) years. The college would like to use predictive
modeling to achieve this objective. The predictive model should provide
insights that can inform business processes related to recruitment and
retention.

Upon meeting with project sponsors, assessing the client for data science
readiness, and defining business and analytic objectives, the project team
embarks on gathering requirements for this project. The business analyst (BA)
identifies all necessary stakeholders and systems related to recruitment and
retention in the college. The BA takes the lead in eliciting information about
user needs and system constraints. In this scenario, requirements elicitation
involves interviewing stakeholders and document analysis. Once user and system
requirements are defined, it is time for the project team to define the
requirements for the analytic solution.

Data Requirements

While distilling analytic objectives for this project, the project team
determined that exploratory analysis of their prospective student data is
needed to perform segmentation for targeted advertising and recruitment
efforts. Prior to performing a segmentation task or cluster analysis, let us
define the requirements for the data that will be explored.

Defining data requirements involves understanding the data needed to reach the
business and analytic objectives. Defining the data requirements will involve
considerations for data sources, data management, and data extraction. The
following questions must be answered to determine the data requirements:

  * How can data be used to meet the business and analytic objectives? 

  * What data is needed for developing the analytic solution? Can the data be collected from credible sources?

  * How can the data be prepared to visualize and answer relevant questions?

Model Requirements

Although the talent for developing models resides within the project team, the
model requirements are defined collaboratively. Model explainability is
important to ensure that a client understands the insights that can be gleaned
from the results/outputs from the model(s). Let’s consider the scenario above,
the client will benefit from models that predict the probability of a
prospective applicant enrolling in the college. Without understanding the
output of a predictive model, the client is not able to decipher the
observations that could have a positive yield from their engagement efforts.
This can result in the college wasting funds in targeting prospective
students, therefore leading to a failed solution.

Model requirements describe the behavior and attributes of a model. The figure
below highlights questions that should be answered defining requirements for a
model/models:

Figure 5: Defining Model Requirements

Reports and Dashboards: "Reports are often considered as a solution for
business intelligence projects. If the college needs to generate reports, the
project team will work with the college to define the requirements for reports
by inquiring about (1) the current reports used in the college and the changes
that need to be made to the reports, (2) data sources for the reports, (3)
considerations for users generating reports i.e. how can an authorized user
customize a report to display the data they need?".

Similar to traditional IT projects, requirements should also be gathered for
analytic solutions that are packaged. i.e. not developed in-house or
outsourced.

Reading: Requirements for an IIoT (Industrial Internet of Things) Predictive
Maintenance Solution.

