

Once the team has identified the precise problem for which data should be
leveraged, it is advisable to explicitly characterize the task to be done at
the analytical level. To do this, one casts the “heart” of the problem into
one or more categories of typical data science tasks:

Classification: Individual instances in the dataset have a categorical (i.e.
non-numerical) label associated with them, or will be labeled as such. The
goal of the project is to develop a system capable of categorizing data points
using these labels. A common variant of classification is sequence labeling,
where individual data points are not independent but form a series. Typical
examples: sentiment analysis of text, labeling images as depicting certain
objects (animals, cars, etc.).

Regression: Individual instances in the dataset have a numerical label
associated with them whose magnitude carries a specific meaning. The goal of
the project is to develop a model capable of predicting this target score for
individual data instances. Like classification, regression is often applied
over dependent series of data points. Typical examples: predicting
measurements in medical or demographic data over time

Retrieval & Ranking: The dataset can be thought of as one or more collections
of data points and queries. In response to the query, one or more “ideal” data
points should be retrieved and presented in a “correct” order. Typical
example: search engines

Recommendation: The dataset consists of users and items, as well as
information about preferences of users for specific items. The task is to find
items to recommend to users towards the maximization of some utility. Typical
examples: movie and product recommendations

Clustering: The dataset is assumed to have some latent structure which should
be discovered by dividing data points into groups that are close to each other
in variants of the feature space. Typical examples: exploratory analyses of
unlabeled data

Anomaly Detection: The dataset is assumed to have some latent structure which
should be discovered in order to identify instances that do not adhere to the
pattern. Typical example: fake customer review detection in online retail data

Domain-specific tasks: Aside from the generic task types explained above, some
domains have developed specific task patterns and associated evaluation
metrics that should be used if the analytic goal is sufficiently specific.
This is particularly true of natural language processing and image analysis.
For example, machine translation will commonly be characterized as a text
generation task and models will be evaluated using a specialized BLEU score.
Similarly, models that segment a part of an image containing a specific object
may be evaluated using average precision in conjunction with an “intersection
over union” threshold.

It should be noted that some of these categories overlap somewhat in that the
methods associated with them can be used in different ways. For example,
ranking problems can be solved using classification or regression methods.
Still, if the primary nature of the problem is that items must be ranked, it
should be evaluated using ranking experiments and metrics even if it is doing
classification “under the hood”.

The purpose of identifying the type of task at this stage is not to firmly
restrict the project to a narrow instrumentarium, but to characterize it for
purposes of planning and communication. Specifically, a possible quantitative
evaluation and the metrics used therein, will typically closely correspond to
the problems primary nature.

