

Proposing Learning Methods

If you have not already, you should notice a pattern at this stage. The
conceptual progression Business Need ⇒ Business Objective ⇒ Analytic Objective
including: Problem Statement ⇒ Task Definition ⇒ Method & Data Statement
serves the purpose of gradually refining our understanding of what the client
needs until we arrive at a technical project specification that the
technicians can design against. The statement of methods to be applied will
vary in specificity depending on your project, but three elements are
important:

  1. It must be precise enough so that the data science team understands it as a concise summary of the technical approach .

  2. At the same time, it should allow for testing different techniques around the main conceptual idea .

  3. The methods should in principle be suitable to produce the target functionality/insight for the task given the available data. 

As you become more proficient in the discipline of data science (e.g. after
having absolved the more advanced units of this course), you will develop
refined intuitions about which method to propose in which context. The most
general categories of methods one can identify in this statement typically
include:

Supervised learning methods, which involves learning to predict a target
variable (typically through regression or classification) by training on
“true” example data points whose target variable has manually been labeled or
is available by other means.

Unsupervised learning methods deal with finding patterns in unlabeled data
without an explicit prediction target.

Semi-Supervised learning methods encompass hybrid methods that combine
supervised and unsupervised learning in different ways.

This course is very focused on the application of machine learning, which has
large overlap with various kinds of statistical methods. It is possible to
phrase your method statement around the use of statistics, but it is
recommended that one qualifies this rather broad term to something adequate
for the project.

Note: the precise categorization of some methods as supervised or unsupervised
methods is subject to some disagreement in the community. After completing
this course, you will be able to make informed decision regarding the use of
these terms.

In many contexts the method will have to be stated much more precisely than
that, especially if the problem domain is already well-studied in data
science, or there is some prior work that should be extended. It can range
from specifying a particular family of models (e.g. linear vs non-linear),
using a new feature set, testing the explainability of a particular model’s
predictions, to optimizing hyperparameters for faster training and inference
in neural networks, and more. We can illustrate the specific vs. general
statement in the context of an example:

Your client gives you access to a large dataset of electronics product
manufacturing and customer support data and asks you to help improve quality
control (business objective) as the personnel does not reliably find all
potential defects (problem). Your model should be able to predict product
failure within one month after sale (task 1) and identify predictors measured
at quality control time (task 2). In a pilot project, you propose to apply
“traditional supervised learning methods to train a classifier and examine the
model for predictive variables”. You then proceed to conduct the project using
basic logistic regression and some nonlinear tree-based models as they allow
straightforward model explanation.

Variation: Your pilot project was a success and your models are being used to
better inform quality control personnel. However, it turns out that it still
produces a high false positive rate (problem) and causes shipping delays,
which the client wants to minimize (business objective). You are asked to
improve the model’s performance by reducing its false positive rate (task).
You are further given access to quality control diagnostic equipment readings,
which the engineers believe are useful to discern whether a product is
defective or just “needs to be broken in”. You hence propose to integrate the
reading data using a special signal encoding algorithm in combination with a
nonlinear model architecture to improve the model.

The method and data are the heart of a data science project. Finding the best
tool for the task is, of course, one of the core skills of being a good data
scientist. This course will give you an introduction to basic methods and
provide you with the opportunity to apply them in course projects. As you gain
deeper knowledge and experience, you will become better not only at analyzing
problems and tasks in different domains, but also at researching data science
literature and libraries effectively and coming up with project proposals that
are aligned with the state of the art. At the same time, thinking through
different approaches and deciding on a set of methods and datasets benefits
from teamwork, open discussion, and active seeking of advice and feedback from
your peers, mentors, and relevant specialists.

A good beginning strategy is to check your proposed method against the target
functionality or insight by conceptually thinking through its application and
explicitly formulating expected results.

In the above electronics scenario, you imagine training a logistic regression
model on the features to predict product failure. Once trained, influential
features should receive high weight in the regression equation, allowing you
to identify them easily, similar to a correlation analysis. If you train a
decision tree, you can identify features by traversing its branches. On the
other hand, if you were to propose to train a complex random forest model to
predict product failure with maximal accuracy, one may object that random
forests are not as easily interpretable as simpler models. It would hence be
an unsuitable method for task 2 in the pilot stage. A good way would be to go
with the simpler models for now and leave more complex models for later phases
if needed. In the variation, a colleague may suggest that the signal encoding
algorithm you plan to use is outdated and recommend you use a more recently
developed encoding. You may research both algorithms and make an informed
decision, or even use both algorithms in a comparative experiment.

