Similar to other business processes, a data science project is complex with
moving parts that include understanding the business needs and objectives of
the company, that influence the stakeholders, existing system environment, and
support structure. The data whose analysis supports the proposed solution may
have to be gathered both from inside and outside the organization. Overall,
this process of initiating and executing a data science project can be
challenging and it requires technical expertise as well as domain guidance. A
Gartner study showed that 85% of data science projects fall short of
expectations. Project expectations are defined by your client and the data
science team creates a solution vision that will meet their expectations. The
path to defining those project expectations must be tread carefully to avoid
project failure.

According to the Chaos Report, a group that tracks IT project failure, reports
that data science projects might fail due to multiple reasons including those
that occur in general IT projects. However, there are some unique issues that
data science teams must consider to ensure the success of their projects. Some
of the reasons for data science project failure include:

  * Insufficient or inappropriate data.

  * Lack of technical data science skills.

  * Issues with project management .

  * Inaccurate interpretation of results.

  * Mismanaged client expectations .

The above-mentioned issues are related to a misunderstanding regarding the
client’s business needs, and to inadequate communication between the data
science project team and the business stakeholders. It is important to
identify and understand your client’s business needs, environment, and current
solution. This will increase the chances of meeting the business objectives
and providing the right analytical solution.

In this unit, we will discuss how to derive analytic objectives from a
client’s or organization’s business needs. In doing so, you need to broaden
your understanding of the data science process beyond the gathering of data
and the application of machine learning methods to a more or less clean
dataset. While these aspects are certainly important parts of many data
science projects, being a successful data scientist involves being mindful of
the big picture to envision, design, implement, and ultimately deploy creative
solutions for real world problems. You will find that this course introduces a
data science approach that is grounded in scientific research, software
engineering principles, and experimentation.

The remainder of this unit focuses on the ability to identify problems and
envision a solution, which is among the most important skills a data scientist
must possess.

