

At the start of a data science project, the data science team will work with a
client to understand the specific business need. Business needs are general
necessities for a company to remain competitive or expand on the long term.
They can typically be stated in broader terms, e.g. acquiring new customers,
reducing production cost, improving the quality of its products, or increasing
brand awareness.

To meet a particular need, the company will identify one or more specific
business objectives it can work towards. These objectives are stated fairly
concretely and often have time periods associated with them after which,
somewhat simplified, they will be considered reached (in case of success), or
not reached (in case of failure). For example, a business may want to increase
sales of a particular product by a certain margin through online advertising,
be smarter about scaling production to market fluctuations, reduce travel
costs for its logistics, or get a better sense of current trends in their
customer base for better product development.

Given a business’s needs and objectives, one can now evaluate whether data
science methods can be used to facilitate the company's efforts to meet them.
However, the objectives in question will typically be framed in terms of
business terminology and assumptions. A data science team will first engage
with the client to understand the situation in sufficient depth and establish
effective communication with the company’s domain experts. Once the team has
familiarized themselves with the problem, as well as the available data and
resources, they will work with the client to develop a solution vision. This
vision is effectively a walkthrough of how a full data-driven solution to the
problem could look like. Based on this, one can identify a set of analytic
objectives that, if achieved, will facilitate realizing the solution and
reaching the business goal.

In this context, an analytic objective states, in specific terms, what the
data science project should produce (insight, resource, model, etc.) and
serves as the main success criterion for the team. On the technical side, it
drives the derivation of requirements for the project. On the business side,
it is critical that analytical objectives stay firmly connected to the
business objectives they facilitate.

