

Throughout this course, you have learned about understanding your client's
needs, develop and implement the right analytic solution to meet those
objectives. At this stage, we want to think through the interpretability of
models. This will be helpful for fixing issues with the model, and explaining
why a model produced its results. Interpretability is a very important
research area in Data Science and Machine Learning. We want to explain why a
model produces certain results and what happens when there are changes within
a model; also known as explainability. Interpretability ensures that a data
scientist can measure the effects of any trade-offs within a model.

Let us turn our attention to the accuracy of a model and how its results can
proffer better solutions and decisions. As you know by now, errors can be the
difference between a useful solution and a solution that will lead to loss of
money and (with how data science solutions are integrated into everyday life)
lives. Accuracy can be defined as the measurement used to determine the best
model for a task. If the model can properly generalize new data, it will
produce better results (such as predictions).

There are certain sectors that are restricted by laws and standards in their
use of certain techniques, an example is the banking and education industry.
Some of these restrictions protect the consumers data and ensure that bias is
not introduced into the decision making process. As you read on the last page,
the more we learn about interpretability, and employ interpretability
strategies, these issues might become a thing of the past. Accuracy is very
important in these sectors and as we have learned, accuracy will typically
lead to less interpretability. The big question is "how can we retain
interpretability, while improving accuracy?"

Hall (2016) has recommended the following steps:

  * Train black box models and use them as benchmarks.

  * Use different regression techniques.

  * Use black box models in the deployment process.

  * Train small interpretable ensemble models.

  * Create nonlinear predictors using black box techniques.

  * Explain black box models better using variable importance measures.

Source: Rane-20181

In the next module, we will discuss the different metrics to evaluate model
accuracy.

