

Reading: Avoiding Bias from Feature Selection.  
  
---  
  
Bias in Data

When understanding and preparing data for the modeling process, there is a
possibility that bias will be introduced into your dataset. This bias can be
conscious or unconscious and the bias will affect the performance of your
model but most importantly, your analytic solution and the decisions made
after implementation of that solution. You are encouraged to explore research
about bias and its implications to Artificial Intelligence 1. Areas of
interest include Algorithmic Bias, Computer Ethics and Roboethics. Ethical
bias is a growing area of research that you will come across throughout your
reading and career.

Feature Engineering and Bias

Feature engineering can be performed before the model building process, i.e.
during the data wrangling and exploratory data analysis phase or it can be
performed during model building. Later in this course, we will discuss cross
validation but we must note here that feature engineering can be done during
the cross validation process. Cross Validation is a model validation technique
used to assess how a model will generalize to a new data set. At this time,
feature engineering is done during the cross validation loop.

Feature engineering at any stage can introduce bias to the data. While you
manipulate the data, you can unintentionally create a relationship between
features that do not otherwise exist. The features that are selected or
created during the feature engineering process can shape the insights that are
gotten from the model.

These are some examples of the types of bias that can be introduced during the
"data understanding" phase of the data science project lifecycle.

Sample Bias. When conducting a study, it is important to collect data from a
representative sample of the population. A study measuring completion rate of
graduate students in the United States with a sample of students from one
socioeconomic background, race or gender will undermine the external validity
of that study. This means the results of the study can not be truly
generalized to the entire population of graduate students in the United
States.

Confirmation Bias. Your prior knowledge, beliefs, and values can play a role
in the data that is used to build your analytic solution, this is because as
humans, we are prone to use our personal beliefs and experiences to guide us
through daily life and decision making. This type of bias occurs when we favor
evidence that confirms our personal beliefs, values and hypotheses.

Information Bias.  Also known as measurement bias, occurs when data is
collected, measured or interpreted wrongly. Misclassification of observations
is an example of information bias, for example an observation with attributes
similar to the stereotypical female student is recorded as female when that
observation is male. Another example is misclassification of patients,
consider the COVID-19 pandemic; groups under the age of 45 are seen as low
risk; so during a screening exercise, those in that age group might not be
screened and therefore classified as negative. The data collected has
misclassification bias and is not accurate. One way to control information
bias is to implement blinding.

Confounding Bias. Addressed in medical research, confounding bias is "the
distortion of the association between an exposure and health outcome by
another variable called a confounder"1.

A responsible data scientist should understand how bias occurs and actively
seek out ways to reduce it; bias creeps in at various stages during the data
science process but it is easily introduced in the data collection, and
feature selection process.

Reading: Data Science Code of Professional Conduct: Checking for Bias.

Reading: Catalog of Bias  
  
---  
Bostrom, N & Yudkowsky, E.Cambridge Handbook of Artificial IntelligenceThe
Ethics of Artificial Intelligence.21 Cambridge University Press.2011C. R.
Turner, A. Fuggetta, L. Lavazza and A. L. WolfFeature engineering [software
development]Proceedings Ninth International Workshop on Software Specification
and Design162-164

