

Poorly documented requirements lead to assumptions and miscommunications
between the project team and client stakeholders. Communication issues can
lead to defects in solutions and unmet expectations. These are issues that a
project team should avoid. This can be done by defining requirements in the
early stages of solution development. Requirements are well documented
statements that define the needs of the users and systems that should be
implemented to solve a business need. The requirements gathering process can
become complex if it is not managed properly. This process is managed by the
business analyst.

There are different types of requirements including business and solution
requirements. Business requirements describe the why behind the implementation
of a solution, the user requirements describe the tasks that users will be
able to perform with the system, and the solution requirements specify the
behavior of the system and its characteristics.

Similar to a traditional IT project, it is best practice to collect
requirements for analytic projects. The requirements for an analytic project
include determining how data, models, and results or outputs of the models
will support meeting the analytic and business objectives.

There are techniques that are used to gather requirements including conducting
interviews, brainstorming sessions and facilitated workshops, other techniques
used in addition to the above listed include document analysis and
observations. Once requirements are elicited, they are analyzed and translated
into written requirements for understanding. Finally, requirements are
validated by the project and client team to signal the commencement of
solution development.

Non-functional requirements for real world big data systems: an investigation
of big data architectures at Facebook, Twitter and Netflix2019ICSOFT
2018-Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Software
TechnologiesIEEEIEEE Guide for Software Requirements Specifications IEEE
Std1984830-1984101-26Sharma, R & Biswas. KFunctional requirements
categorization Grounded Theory approach2015301-3072015 International
Conference on Evaluation of Novel Approaches to Software Engineering
(ENASE)Wiegers, K., & Beatty, J.Software requirements.Pearson Education20133

